61A Course Information and Policies {.header}
-----------------------------------

Course website:
[http://www-inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/\~cs61a/fa13/](http://www-inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~cs61a/fa13/)

### Course Description {.section}

The CS 61 series is an introduction to computer science, with particular
emphasis on software and on machines from a programmer's point of view.
This first course concentrates mostly on the idea of abstraction,
allowing the programmer to think in terms appropriate to the problem
rather than in low-level operations dictated by the computer hardware.
The next course, CS 61B, will deal with the more advanced engineering
aspects of software, such as constructing and analyzing large programs.
Finally, CS 61C concentrates on machines and how they carry out the
programs you write.

In CS 61A, we are interested in teaching you about programming, not
about how to use one particular programming language. We consider a
series of techniques for controlling program complexity, such as
functional programming, data abstraction, and object-oriented
programming. Mastery of a particular programming language is a very
useful side effect of studying these general techniques. However, our
hope is that once you have learned the essence of programming, you will
find that picking up a new programming language is but a few days' work.

There is also a self-paced version of this course, [61AS](61as.html),
which fulfills the same requirements.

### Programming Language {.section}

61A uses the Python 3 programming language. Python is a popular language
in both industry and academia. It is also particularly well-suited to
the task of exploring the topics taught in this course. It is an
open-source language developed by a large volunteer community that
prides itself on the diversity of its contributors.

In previous semesters, this course was taught using the Scheme language,
a dialect of Lisp, which is the oldest programming language that is
still recruiting new users today. Lisp and Python are similar in many
ways. In fact, Lisp popularized many of the features that make Python a
great language. Our choice to change languages is primarily motivated by
the strength of Python's programming community, which you will soon join
as you learn the language. Python also has excellent library support for
a vast range of application areas. Knowing Python will help you pursue
your future programming interests, wherever they may lead you.

### Prerequisites {.section}

Math 1A is a corequisite for 61A. (That is, it may be taken
concurrently.)

There is no formal programming-related prerequisites for admission to
61A. However, most 61A students have had significant prior programming
experience. There is no need for you to be familiar with any particular
programming language. If you have taken the CS Advanced Placement AB
course in C++ or Java, you are certainly ready for 61A.

If you don't feel ready for 61A, we recommend that you take [CS 10 : The
Beauty and Joy of Computing](http://inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~cs10/),
which is an introduction to computer science for non-majors (and majors
needing more programming experience). The course will teach students how
to program using BYOB (based on Scratch), one of the friendliest
programming languages ever invented. It's purely graphical, which means
programming involves simply dragging blocks around, and building bigger
blocks out of smaller blocks. But the course is far more than just
learning to program! You'll learn some of the "Big Ideas" of computing,
such as abstraction, design, recursion, concurrency, simulations, and
the limits of computation. You'll also see some beautiful applications
of computing that have changed the world, as well as talk about the
history of computing and where it will go in the future.

Non-technical students (for instance, ones who prefer Math 16A to Math
1A) should probably avoid CS 61A entirely, and should take CS 10 to
satisfy their need for or interest in a programming course.

If you are not strongly interested in computer programming at all, but
instead want to learn how to use computers as a tool, you should
consider IDS 110, a course that presents a variety of personal computer
software along with a brief introduction to programming.

If you have substantial prior programming background, you may feel that
you can skip 61A. In most cases we don't recommend that. Although 61A is
the first course in the CS sequence, it's quite different from most
introductory courses. You won't be bored in 61A. Perhaps your prior
experience will allow you to skip 61B or 61C, which are more comparable
to courses taught elsewhere.

### Course Materials {.section}

There is no required textbook for this course. Our primary text will be
a series of lecture notes based on the classic book, [Structure and
Interpretation of Computer
Programs](http://mitpress.mit.edu/sicp/full-text/book/book.html), which
has been the textbook for 61A for many years. Lecture notes will be
posted to the course website.

### Lab and Discussion Sections {.section}

In addition to the lectures Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, the course
consists of one discussion section and one laboratory section each week.
(During the first full week, you will have two labs and no sections.)

The discussion sections are run by an amazing group of Teaching
Assistants; each TA will handle enrollment for his or her sections. This
course is currently full, so please attend your assigned section.

Make sure that you are in a definite section by next week, because the
course projects are done in pairs. We strongly encourage you to find a
partner in your own section. Your TA will help you.

You are expected to attend all class meetings, including lectures,
sections, and labs. We do not track attendance at any class meetings,
but we do assign points for participation at the end of the term (see
grading).

**Enrollment:** Your TA does not have any power over enrollment
whatsoever. Admission to the class is controlled by the EECS department.

### Computer Accounts {.section}

*You must* have a computer account on the 61A course facility. To set up
an account, you need an account form, which you will receive in the
first lab.

You must set up your account in the first week because that is how we
know who is really in the class. If you are pre-enrolled but do not set
up your account this week, you may be dropped from the course! Account
forms will be distributed in lab and office hours this week. The first
time you log in, you will be asked to type in your name and reg card
number, if you have one. *Please follow the instructions carefully.* You
must get your account and log into it no later than 4pm on the second
Friday of class so that we have an accurate class count.

If you plan to use your personal computer for the course projects, you
must get a class account, even if you intend never to use it. Class
accounts are required for submitting assignments.

If you are not pre-enrolled and want to take 61A, you have to add the
course using Tele-BEARS. If you are something other than a regular
Berkeley undergraduate, then you probably need a signature on a form
admitting you to the course: contact the instructor directly.

### Ask Questions! {.section}

Your first and most important resource for help in learning the material
in this course is your fellow students. Work closely with your project
partner. You are responsible for helping each other learn.

If you have questions that others might have as well, regarding
projects, homeworks, course policies, etc., post your questions to
[Piazza](http://www.piazza.com/class), the course messaging service.
Piazza allows you to answer questions from other students. Your
contributions (questions and answers) to this online forum will also
contribute to your participation score in the course.

The class will have a staff of undergraduate Lab Assistants (LAs). Each
LA will have scheduled hours to be in the lab. Whenever an LA is in the
lab you may request that s/he answer questions about the homework or
programs (but not do them for you).

The instructor and the Teaching Assistants who teach the discussion
sections are also available to answer questions. You may drop in during
office hours, make appointments for other times, or email us.

### Computer Resources {.section}

The computing laboratories in 271, 273, and 275 Soda are our primary lab
rooms, although the CS 61A accounts can also be used from any EECS
Instructional lab in Soda or Cory Hall. The lab is normally available
for use at all times, but you need a card key for evening access to the
lab.

**Current UCB students:** If you are enrolled in the course, your Cal
student ID serves as your card key and will automatically be activated
for access to the Soda second floor labs (including entering the
building). You do not have to do anything, unless for some reason it
doesn't work, then see below.

**Concurrent/other students**: You can fill out an application and
obtain a white card key from 387 Soda Hall (the front desk). There is a
small fee for access.

During scheduled lab sessions, only students enrolled in that particular
section may be in the lab. At other hours, any 61A student may use the
lab on a drop-in basis. (The labs on the second floor of Soda Hall are
unlocked during daytime hours.)

Be respectful of the lab space. Please don't steal the chairs, or bring
in food or drinks. Don't unplug anything; unplugged computers make our
hard-working instructional computing team very sad. Don't monopolize a
workstation for six hours during prime time to play games. If you see
someone disrupting the space, ask them to stop.

You have a homework assignment in the first week that requires you to
work on the computer; part of the purpose of the assignment is to ensure
that you know how to create, edit, and print files. Pick up your
computer account this week, whether or not you are pre-enrolled.

### Projects and Homeworks {.section}

Each week there will be problems assigned for you to work on, most of
which will involve writing and debugging programs. These assignments
come in three categories:

-   **Laboratory exercises** are short, relatively simple exercises
    designed to introduce a new topic. You'll do these during the
    scheduled lab meetings.
-   **Homework assignments** are slightly more involved versions of lab
    exercises, meant to illustrate and explore new topics. Homeworks are
    generally assigned on Fridays and due the following Friday at 5pm.
    You are encouraged to discuss the homework with other students, but
    your final solution should be developed either alone or with one
    partner.
-   **Projects** are larger assignments intended to teach you how to
    combine ideas from the course in interesting ways. There are four
    projects during the semester. You are encouraged to complete
    projects in pairs; your partner should be another student in your
    section.

The purpose of the homework is for you to learn the course material, not
to prove that you already know it. Therefore, the weekly homeworks are
not graded on the correctness of your solutions, but on effort. You will
get full credit for an entirely wrong answer that shows reasonable
effort! Homeworks will be graded automatically.

Each homework is worth two points for a reasonable effort, zero points
for a missing homework or one that seems to show no effort, or negative
ten (-10) points for a solution copied from someone else.

The four programming projects are graded on the correctness and clarity
of your solutions. If you work with a partner (which you should), work
together to ensure that both group members understand the complete
program you create.

Projects and homeworks will be submitted online. Through a web-based
code review system, you will receive detailed feedback on your projects.

### Tests and Grading {.section}

Your course grade is computed using a point system with a total of 300
points, with the following distribution.

-   Two midterms, each worth 50 points.
-   One final exam, worth 80 points.
-   Four projects, worth a total of 90 points
-   Homework, quizzes, and participation, worth a total of 30 points

Midterms are held in the evenings from 7pm-9pm to give you more time to
complete them than lecture would allow. You will be allowed to bring a
fixed number of pages of notes to each exam. Details of this policy will
be released as the exam approaches.

**Midterms will be held on Monday 9/23 and 10/28**! If you are not
available from 7pm to 9pm on those days, notify your TA immediately.

Each letter grade for the course corresponds to a range of scores:

    A+  290+        A  278-289     A-  271-277
    B+  253-270     B  237-252     B-  221-236
    C+  214-220     C  207-213     C-  200-206
    D+  190-199     D  180-189     D-  170-179

Notice that this scale is nonlinear; the steps are wider in the B range.

This grading formula implies that *there is no curve*; your grade will
depend only on how well you do, and not on how well everyone else does.

Incomplete grades will be granted only for dire medical or personal
emergencies that cause you to miss the final, and only if your work up
to that point has been satisfactory.

**New midterm recovery policy declared on 11/4/2013**: On the final
exam, you can earn back a fraction of the points you lost on the
midterms. If X is the sum of your midterm 1 and midterm 2 scores, you
will earn back up to 75% of max(0, 60-X). The fraction you earn back is
based on your final score Y and is computed as min(45, Y-20)/60.

For example, if the sum of your midterm scores is 30/100 and your final
score is 40/80, then you earn back 20/60=33.3% of 60-30=30 points,
giving you an extra 10 points. Assuming a full score on projects and
homework (e.g., 120/120 non- exam points), you will earn a C-.

### Learning Cooperatively {.section}

With the obvious exception of exams, we encourage you to discuss *all*
of the course activities with your friends and classmates as you are
working on them. You will definitely learn more in this class if you
work with others than if you do not. Ask questions, answer questions,
and share ideas liberally.

To encourage participation, you will receive a small number of points
for Effort, Participation and Altruism. This grade will not be given
until the semester is over, and is a confidential value determined by
the course staff. Effort is a measure of how hard you "try". E.g., Do
you come to lab? Do you attend review sessions? Do you come to office
hours? Do you keep up with the lab activities (whether or not you get
them right)? Participation measures whether you speak up in lab and
lecture and help make the class dynamic and interactive. Do you
contribute to the community of the class? Online participation certainly
counts. Altruism measures how much you help your fellow students learn.
One of the best ways to learn is to teach someone else.

Since you're working collaboratively, keep your project partner and TA
informed. If some medical or personal emergency takes you away from the
course for an extended period, or if you decide to drop the course for
any reason, please don't just disappear silently! You should inform your
project partner and your TA, so that nobody is depending on you to do
something you can't finish.

### Academic Honesty {.section}

Cooperation has a limit, however, and in 61A that limit is code.
Homework problems should be completed and turned in individually. Feel
free to discuss the problems with others beforehand; just submit your
own work in the end. Projects are to be completed in pairs, but you may
discuss them more broadly than with your partner. However, you *should
not* be sharing lines of code with others or reading code from other
people's projects. Write your own programs and keep them to yourself.

I expect you to hand in your own work, take your own tests, and complete
your own projects. The assignments and evaluations are structured to
help you learn, which is why you're in College. The course staff works
hard to put together this course, and we ask in return that you respect
the integrity of the course by not misrepresenting your work.

The EECS Department Policy on Academic Dishonesty says, "Copying all or
part of another person's work, or using reference materials not
specifically allowed, are forms of cheating and will not be tolerated."
The policy statement goes on to explain the penalties for cheating,
which range from a zero grade for the test up to dismissal from the
University, for a second offense.

Rather than copying someone else's work, ask for help. You are not alone
in this course! The TAs, lab assistants, and instructor are all here to
help you succeed. If you invest the time to learn the material and
complete the projects, you won't need to copy any answers.

### Early Policy {.section}

On each project, you can earn an additional bonus point by submitting
the project at least 24 hours before the deadline. You can earn one
additional point over the semester by submitting at least half of your
homework assignments at least 24 hours before their respective
deadlines.

### Late Policy {.section}

If you cannot turn in an assignment on time, contact your TA and partner
as early as possible. Late project submission requires approval by your
TA. Typically, projects will be accepted up to 24 hours after the
deadline, but late projects will only receive 2/3 of the earned score.
No credit will be given for late homework, or for projects turned in
more than one day late. Exceptions may be made for *extraordinary*
circumstances.

### A Parting Thought {.section}

This document shouldn't end with a list of late penalties, because
penalties and grades aren't the purpose of the course. We actually just
want you to learn. We're very excited to have such a large and
enthusiastic group of students this semester. We want all of you to be
successful here. Welcome to 61A.
