Project 3: Ants Vs. SomeBees
----------------------------

> ![](img/ants_vs_bees.png)
> The bees are coming!\
>  Create a better soldier\
>  With inherit-ants.

### Introduction

In this project, you will create a [tower
defense](https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/Tower_defense)
game called Ants Vs. SomeBees. As the ant queen, you populate your
colony with the bravest ants you can muster. Your ants must protect
their queen from the evil bees that invade your territory. Irritate the
bees enough by throwing leaves at them, and they will be vanquished.
Fail to pester the airborne intruders adequately, and your queen will
succumb to the bees' wrath. This game is inspired by PopCap Games'
[Plants Vs. Zombies](http://www.popcap.com/games/pvz/web) Â®.

This project combines functional and object-oriented programming
paradigms, focusing on the material from Chapter 2.5 of the lecture
notes. The project also involves understanding, extending, and testing a
large program with many related parts.

This project includes several files, but all of your changes will be
made to the first one. You can download all of the project code as a
[zip archive](ants.zip).

  ------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  `ants.py`          The game logic of Ants Vs. SomeBees.
  `ants_grader.py`   A suite of tests for the project.
  `ants_gui.py`      Graphics for Ants Vs. SomeBees.
  `graphics.py`      General functions for displaying simple two-dimensional animations.
  `ucb.py`           Utility functions for CS 61A.
  `autograder.py`    Utility functions for grading.
  `img`              A directory of images used by the graphical version of the game.
  ------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------

### Logistics

This is a two-week project. You'll work in a team of two people, person
A and person B. In each part, you will do some of the work separately
and some together with your partner. For example, if a problem is marked
A1, then it is a solo problem for person A. Both partners should read,
think about, and understand the solution to all questions. Feel free to
help each other on the solo questions. If you choose to work on the
whole project alone, you must complete all questions yourself.

Start early! The amount of time it takes to complete a project (or any
program) is unpredictable. Ask for help early and often -- the TAs and
lab assistants are here to help. You are not alone!

In the end, you and your partner will submit one project.
Person-specific problems are graded individually and do not affect your
partner's score. There are 25 possible points for each person, 22 of
which are assigned for correctness, and three points for the overall
composition of your program. There are also two points of extra credit
available at the end of the project, due with your submission.

The only file that you are required to submit is `ants.py`. You do not
need to modify any other files to complete the project. To submit the
project, change to the directory where the files are located and run
`submit proj3`.

### Core Concepts

A game of Ants Vs. SomeBees consists of a series of turns. In each turn,
new bees may enter the ant colony. Then, new ants are placed. Finally,
all insects (ants, then bees) take individual actions: bees sting ants,
and ants throw leaves at bees. The game ends either when a bee reaches
the ant queen (you lose), or the entire bee flotilla has been vanquished
(you win).

**The Colony**. The colony consists of several places that are chained
together. The `exit` of each `Place` leads to another `Place`.

**Placing Ants**. There are two constraints that limit ant production.
Placing an ant uses up some amount of the colony's food, a different
amount for each type of ant. Also, only one ant can occupy each `Place`.

**Bees**. When it is time to act, a bee either moves to the `exit` of
its current `Place` if no ant blocks its path, or stings an ant that
blocks its path.

**Ants**. Each type of ant takes a different action and requires a
different amount of food to place. The two most basic ant types are the
`HarvesterAnt`, which adds one food to the colony during each turn, and
the `ThrowerAnt`, which throws a leaf at a bee each turn.

### The Code

Most concepts in the game have a corresponding class that encapsulates
the logic for that concept. For instance, a `Place` in the colony holds
insects and connects to other places. A `Bee` stings ants and advances
through exits.

The game can be run in two modes: as a text-based game or using a
graphical user interface (GUI). The game logic is the same in either
case, but the GUI enforces a turn time limit that makes playing the game
more exciting. The text-based interface is provided for debugging and
development.

The files are separated according to these two modes. `ants.py` knows
nothing of graphics or turn time limits. All graphical elements are
specified in `ants_gui.py` and `graphics.py`. It is possible to complete
this project without ever reading the graphics files.

To start a text-based game, run

    python3 ants.py

To start a graphical game, run

    python3 ants_gui.py

When you start the graphical version, a new window should appear:

![](img/gui_explanation.png)

In the starter implementation, you have unlimited food and your ants
only throw leaves at bees in their current `Place`. Try playing a game
anyway! You'll need to place a lot of `ThrowerAnt`s (the second type) in
order to keep the bees from reaching your queen.

The game has several options that you will use throughout the project,
which you can view with `--help`.

    python3 [ants.py|ants_gui.py] [OPTIONS]
        Run the Ants vs. SomeBees project.

        -h, --help      Prints this help message
        -t, --ten       Start with ten food
        -f, --full      Loads a full layout and assault plan
        -w, --water     Loads a full layout with water
        -i, --insane    Loads a difficult assault plan

You have also been provided a testing file `ants_grader.py` that runs a
series of unit tests for the project. To test your project, you can run

    python3 ants_grader.py -v

This command runs all of the unit tests along with any doctests in
`ants.py`. The optional `-v` generates more verbose output. You can also
run tests for individual questions:

    python3 ants_grader.py -q 2
    python3 ants_grader.py -q A5

If you would like to learn more about Python's built-in unit testing
framework, read the documentation of the [unittest
module](http://docs.python.org/py3k/library/unittest.html). Most
problems have associated tests. Make sure that the tests for each
problem pass before moving on.

### Phase 1

#### Both Partners

**Problem 1** (0 pts). Answer the following questions with your partner
after you have read the *entire* `ants.py` file. If you cannot answer
these questions, read the file again.

1.  Which method in which class runs a game? (the answer is not `run`,
    because `run` is not a method)!
2.  The `Hive`, a subclass of `Place`, is the starting location of the
    bees. Unlike most instances of `Place`, the `Hive` class does not
    have an `exit`. Explain how and when `Bee`s leave the `Hive`.
3.  Explain the mechanism in the code by which the places in the colony
    are laid out. How do you modify the code to produce more places?
4.  What is the significance of an `Insect`'s `armor` attribute? What
    happens when `armor` reaches 0?

**Problem 2** (2 pts). Add food costs and implement harvesters.
Currently, there is no cost for deploying any type of `Ant`, and so
there is no challenge to the game. You'll notice that `Ant` starts out
with a base `food_cost` of 0. Override this value in each of the
subclasses listed below with the correct costs.

**Class**

**Food**

**Armor**

![](img/ant_harvester.gif) \
 `HarvesterAnt`

2

1

![](img/ant_thrower.gif) \
 `ThrowerAnt`

4

1

Now there's no way to gather more food! To fix this issue, implement the
`HarvesterAnt` class. A `HarvesterAnt` is a type of `Ant` that adds one
food to the `colony.food` total as its `action`.

Try playing the game again. Once you have placed a `HarvesterAnt`, you
should accumulate food each turn. Vanquishing the bees using the default
game setup is now possible.

**Problem 3** (1 pts). Add code to the `Place` constructor that tracks
entrances. Right now, a `Place` keeps track only of its `exit`. We would
like a `Place` to keep track of its entrance as well. A `Place` needs to
track only one `entrance`.

However, simply passing an entrance to a `Place` constructor will be
problematic; we will need to have both the exit and the entrance before
we can create a `Place`! (It's a [chicken or the
egg](https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/Chicken_or_the_egg)
problem.) To get around this problem, we will keep track of entrances in
the following way instead. The `Place` constructor should specify that:

-   A newly created `Place` always starts with its `entrance` as `None`.
-   If the `Place` has an `exit`, then the `exit`'s `entrance` is set to
    that `Place`.

#### Person A: Water and Fire

**Problem A4** (2 pts). Add water to the colony. Currently there are
only two types of places, the `Hive` and a basic `Place`. To make things
more interesting, we're going to create a new type of `Place` called
`Water`.

Only an ant that is `watersafe` can be deployed to a `Water` place. In
order to determine whether an `Insect` is `watersafe`, add a new
attribute to the `Insect` class named `watersafe` that is `False` by
default. Since bees can fly, make their `watersafe` attribute `True`,
overriding the default.

Now, implement the `add_insect` method for `Water`. First call
`Place.add_insect` to add the insect, regardless of whether it is
watersafe. Then, if the insect is not watersafe, reduce the insect's
armor to 0 by invoking `reduce_armor`. **Do not** copy and paste code.
Try to use methods that have already been defined and make use of
inheritance to reuse the functionality of the `Place` class.

Once you've finished this problem, play a game that includes water. To
access the `mixed_layout` that includes water, add the `--water` option
(or `-w` for short) when you start the game.

    python3 ants_gui.py --water

**Problem A5** (3 pts). Implement the `FireAnt`. A `FireAnt` has a
special `reduce_armor` method: when the `FireAnt`'s armor reaches zero
or lower, it will reduce the armor of *all* `Bee`s in the same `Place`
as the `FireAnt` by its `damage` attribute (defaults to `3`).

**Class**

**Food**

**Armor**

![](img/ant_fire.gif) \
 `FireAnt`

4

1

*Hint:* If you iterate over a list, but change the contents of that list
at the same time, you may not see all the elements. As the [Python
tutorial](http://docs.python.org/py3k/tutorial/controlflow.html#for-statements)
suggests, "If you need to modify the list you are iterating over, you
must iterate over a copy." Remember that damaging a bee may cause it to
be removed from its place.

Once you've finished implementing the `FireAnt`, give it a class
attribute `implemented` with the value `True`. This attribute tells the
game that you've added a new type of `Ant`.

After implementing `FireAnt`, be sure to test your program by playing a
game or two! A `FireAnt` should destroy any co-located Bees when it
dies. To start a game with ten food, use `--ten`.

#### Person B: Extended Range

**Problem B4** (2 pts). Implement the `nearest_bee` method for the
`ThrowerAnt` class. In order for a `ThrowerAnt` to attack, it must know
which bee it should hit. The provided implementation will only hit bees
in the same `Place`. Your job is to fix it so that a `ThrowerAnt` will
`throw_at` the nearest bee in front of it that is not still in the
`Hive`.

The `nearest_bee` method returns a random `Bee` from the nearest place
that contains bees. Places are inspected in order by following their
`entrance` attributes.

-   Start from the current `Place` of the `ThrowerAnt`.
-   For each place, return a random bee if there is any, or consider the
    next place that is stored as the current place's `entrance`.

After implementing `nearest_bee`, a `ThrowerAnt` should be able to
`throw_at` a `Bee` in front of it that is not still in the `Hive`. Make
sure that your ants do the right thing! To start a game with ten food,
use `--ten`.

**Problem B5** (3 pts). Now that the `ThrowerAnt` has been completed,
implement two subclasses of `ThrowerAnt`.

-   The `LongThrower` can only `throw_at` a `Bee` that is found after
    following at least 4 `entrance` transitions. So the `LongThrower`
    can't hit `Bee`s that are in the same `Place` as it or the first 3
    `Place`s in front of it. If there are two `Bees`, one too close to
    the `LongThrower` and the other within its range, the `LongThrower`
    should throw past the closer `Bee`, instead targeting the farther
    one, which is within its range.
-   The `ShortThrower` can only `throw_at` a `Bee` that is found after
    following at most 2 `entrance` transitions. So the `ShortThrower`
    can only hit `Bee`s in the same `Place` as it and 2 `Place`s in
    front of it.

Neither of these specialized throwers can `throw_at` a `Bee` that is
exactly 3 `Place`s away. Placing a single one of these (and no other
ants) should never win a default game.

  --------------------------------- ---------- -----------
  **Class**                         **Food**   **Armor**

  ![](img/ant_shortthrower.gif) \   3          1
   `ShortThrower`                              

  ![](img/ant_longthrower.gif) \    3          1
   `LongThrower`                               
  --------------------------------- ---------- -----------

To implement these behaviors, modify the `nearest_bee` method to
reference `min_range` and `max_range` attributes, and only return a bee
that is in range.

For the base class, `ThrowerAnt`, set `min_range` to 0 and `max_range`
to 10. Then, implement the subclasses `LongThrower` and `ShortThrower`
with appropriately constrained ranges and correct food costs.

Set the `implemented` class attribute of `LongThrower` and
`ShortThrower` to `True`.

Try playing a game with your newly implemented ants. Be sure that they
do what you expect them to! You can try running `ants_gui.py` with the
`--full` option to go up against a full swarm of bees in a multi-tunnel
layout, and add `--insane` if you want a real challenge! If the bees are
too numerous to vanquish, you might need to create some new ants in
Phase 2.

### Phase 2

#### Person A: Seen and Unseen

**Problem A6** (1 pts). We are going to add some protection to our
glorious `AntColony` by implementing the `WallAnt`, which is an ant that
does nothing each turn (already the default `action` of the `Ant`
class). A `WallAnt` is useful because it has a large `armor` value.

**Class**

**Food**

**Armor**

![](img/ant_wall.gif) \
 `WallAnt`

4

4

**Problem A7** (3 pts). Implement the `NinjaAnt`, which damages all
`Bee`s that pass by, but is never seen.

**Class**

**Food**

**Armor**

![](img/ant_ninja.gif) \
 `NinjaAnt`

6

1

A `NinjaAnt` is not able to be attacked by a `Bee` because it is hidden,
nor does it block the path of a `Bee` that flies by. To implement this
behavior, first modify the `Ant` class to include a new class attribute
`blocks_path` that is `True` by default. Set the value of `blocks_path`
to `False` in the `NinjaAnt` class.

Second, modify the `Bee`'s method `blocked` to return `False` if either
there is no `Ant` in the `Bee`'s `place` or if there is an `Ant`, but
its `blocks_path` attribute is `False`. Now `Bee`s will just fly past
`NinjaAnt`s.

Finally, we want to make the `NinjaAnt` damage all `Bee`'s that fly
past. Implement the `action` method in `NinjaAnt` to reduce the armor of
all `Bee`s in the same `place` as the `NinjaAnt` by 1, overriding the
default action method inherited from `Ant`. Make sure that you override
and use the inherited damage variable.

For a challenge, try to win a default game using only `HarversterAnt`
and `NinjaAnt`.

#### Person B: By Land and Sea

**Problem B6** (1 pts). Currently there are no ants that can be placed
on `Water`. Implement the `ScubaThrower`, which is a subclass of
`ThrowerAnt` that is more costly and `watersafe`, but otherwise
identical to its base class.

  -------------------------- ---------- -----------
  **Class**                  **Food**   **Armor**

  ![](img/ant_scuba.gif) \   5          1
   `ScubaThrower`                       
  -------------------------- ---------- -----------

Placing a `ScubaAnt` in `Water` should not cause it to die.

**Problem B7** (3 pts). We will now implement the new offensive unit
called the `HungryAnt`, which will eat a random `Bee` from its `place`,
instantly killing the `Bee`. After eating a `Bee`, it must spend 3 turns
digesting before eating again.

**Class**

**Food**

**Armor**

![](img/ant_hungry.gif) \
 `HungryAnt`

4

1

To implement, give `HungryAnt` a `time_to_digest` class attribute that
holds the number of turns that it takes all `HungryAnt`s to digest
(default to 3). Also, give each `HungryAnt` an instance attribute
`digesting` that counts the number of turns it has left to digest
(default is 0, since it hasn't eaten anything at the beginning).

Now we implement the `action` method of the `HungryAnt` to check if it's
digesting; if so, decrement its `digesting` counter. Otherwise, eat a
random `Bee` in its `place` (killing the `Bee` and restarting the
`digesting` timer).

#### Both Partners

**Problem 8** (5 pts). Implement the `BodyguardAnt`. Right now, our ants
are quite frail. We'd like to provide a way to help them last longer
against the onslaught of the bees. Enter the `BodyguardAnt`.

  -------------------------- ---------- -----------
  **Class**                  **Food**   **Armor**

  ![](img/ant_weeds.gif) \   4          2
   `BodyguardAnt`                       
  -------------------------- ---------- -----------

A `BodyguardAnt` differs from a normal `Ant` because it can occupy the
same `Place` as another ant. When a `BodyguardAnt` is added to the same
`Place` as another ant, it shields the other ant and protects it from
damage. Attacks should damage the `BodyguardAnt` first and only hurt the
protected ant after the `BodyguardAnt` has perished.

A `BodyguardAnt` has an instance attribute `ant` that stores the ant
contained within the bodyguard. It should start off as `None`,
indicating that no ant is currently being protected. Give `BodyguardAnt`
a `contain_ant` method that takes an `Ant` argument and sets the `ant`
instance attribute to that argument.

Now, change your program so that a `BodyguardAnt` and another `Ant` can
simultaneously occupy the same `Place`:

1.  Add an `Ant.container` class attribute that indicates whether an ant
    can contain another. For all `Ant`s except `BodyguardAnt`,
    `container` should be `False`. The `BodyguardAnt.container`
    attribute should be `True`.
2.  We also need to give `Ant`s a new method, `can_contain`, that takes
    an `other` ant as an argument and returns `True` if and only if:
    1.  This ant is a container.
    2.  This ant does not already contain another ant.
    3.  The other ant is not a container.

3.  Right now, if we attempt to put a second ant in a `Place`, the
    `add_insect` method of the `Place` class will immediately cause an
    error. Change `add_insect` so that the `Place` contains the
    container ant and the container ant contains the other ant:
    -   If the `Ant` currently occupying this `Place` can contain the
        `Ant` we are trying to add, then simply tell it to do so.
    -   If the `Ant` we are trying to add can contain the `Ant`
        currently occupying this `Place`, then have it do so *and* set
        this `Place`'s ant to be the newly added `Ant`.
    -   If neither `Ant` can contain the other, then raise the same
        assertion error as before.
    -   *Hint:* Remember that you can quit out of a function at any
        point by just saying `return`.

Almost done! Just a few more things to do.

1.  If a `BodyguardAnt` containing another ant is removed, then the ant
    it is containing should be placed where the `BodyguardAnt` used to
    be. Update the `remove_insect` method in the `Place` class
    accordingly.
2.  The last step is to make sure that ants that are contained by
    `BodyguardAnt`s still perform their action. Override the `action`
    method for `BodyguardAnt` accordingly.

**Problem 9** (5 pts). Implement the `QueenAnt`. The queen is a
waterproof `ScubaThrower` that inspires her fellow ants through her
bravery. Whenever the queen throws a leaf, she also doubles the damage
of all other ants in the same tunnel with her, including any ants
protected by a bodyguard. Once any ant's damage has doubled, it cannot
be doubled again.

  -------------------------- ---------- -----------
  **Class**                  **Food**   **Armor**

  ![](img/ant_queen.gif) \   6          1
   `QueenAnt`                           
  -------------------------- ---------- -----------

However, with great power comes great responsibility. The Queen is
governed by three special rules:

1.  If a bee ever enters the place occupied by the queen, then the bees
    immediately win the game. The game ends even if the queen is
    protected by a bodyguard. The bees also win if any bee reaches the
    end of a tunnel where the queen normally would reside.

    In `AntColony.simulate`, the bees win the game whenever
    `len(self.queen.bees) > 0`, where `self` is the ant colony.
    Normally, the `queen` attribute of an `AntColony` is an instance of
    a `Place`. As part of the `action` of a `QueenAnt`, the
    `colony.queen` should be replaced by a new object, a `QueenPlace`. A
    `QueenPlace` has a `bees` property method that evaluates to the list
    of all bees that are either in the original `colony.queen` location
    or the `place` of the `QueenAnt`.

    You should not have to change the implementation of
    `AntColony.simulate` or manipulate the location of bees in any
    special way. You may assume that a `colony.queen` attribute will be
    used for only one purpose: to check whether
    `len(self.queen.bees) >   0`. Thus, a `QueenPlace` instance does not
    need to support other `Place` methods, such as `add_insect`.

2.  There can be only one true queen. Any queen beyond the first one is
    an impostor and should die immediately (its armor reduced to 0) upon
    taking its first action, without doubling any ant's damage or
    throwing anything. Impostor queens should not affect the colony's
    `queen` attribute. You can detect impostor queens by counting the
    number of times that an instance of a `QueenAnt` has been
    constructed, using a class attribute. Any `QueenAnt` beyond the
    first one created is an impostor. You should not have to search
    through the colony places to find other queens.
3.  The true (first) queen cannot be removed. Attempts to remove the
    queen should have no effect (but should not cause an error). You
    will need to modify the `remove_insect` method of `Place` to enforce
    this condition.

Some suggestions:

-   You can find every `Place` in a tunnel by starting at one `Place`
    and then repeatedly follow both its `exit` and `entrance` attributes
    to the ends.
-   To detect whether a `Place` is at the end of a tunnel, check whether
    its `exit` or `entrance` is `None`.
-   To make sure that you don't double the damage of the same ant twice,
    keep a list of all the ants that have been doubled.

**Extra Credit** (2 pts). Implement two final thrower ants that do no
damage, but instead replace the `action` method of a `Bee` instance that
they `throw_at` with a new method that alters the `Bee`'s behavior for
some duration.

We will be implementing two new ants that subclass `ThrowerAnt`.

-   `SlowThrower` applies a slow effect for 3 turns.
-   `StunThrower` applies a stun effect for 1 turn.

  --------------------------- ---------- -----------
  **Class**                   **Food**   **Armor**

  ![](img/ant_freeze.gif) \   4          1
   `SlowThrower`                         

  ![](img/ant_stun.gif) \     6          1
   `StunThrower`                         
  --------------------------- ---------- -----------

In order to complete the implementations of these two ants, you will
need to set their class attributes appropriately and implement the
following three functions:

-   `make_slow` takes an `action` method and returns a new `action`
    method which performs the original action on turns where
    `colony.time` is even and does nothing on other turns.
-   `make_stun` takes an `action` method and returns a new `action`
    method which does nothing.
-   `apply_effect` takes an `effect` (either `make_slow` or
    `make_stun`), a `bee`, and a `duration`. It then takes the bee's
    original action along with the "affected action" (the result of
    calling `effect` on the original action) and replaces the bee's
    action with a new action method that will call the affected action
    for `duration` turns and then will go back to calling the original
    action every turn.

Make sure to test your code! Your code should be able to apply multiple
effects on a target (each new effect applies on top of whatever action
method the bee already has at that point, and the target returns to the
previous action when the new one runs out).

**You are now done with the project!** If you weren't able to vanquish
the bees' insane-mode assault plan before, do your new ants help? Add
some water or design your own layout to keep things interesting.

Feel free to design additional ants, layouts, and assault plans and post
them to Piazza.

**Acknowledgments:** Tom Magrino and Eric Tzeng developed this project
with John DeNero. Jessica Wan contributed the artwork. Joy Jeng and Mark
Miyashita invented the queen ant. Many others have contributed to the
project as well!
